[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A world of wisdom awaits you.
You never know who
you're going to see
or what you're going to find.
From feng shui,
self-empowerment, meditation,
yoga, interviews with
leaders and teachers
in the vast human
potential field,
plus special news
breaking moments and words
of inspiration.
On the cutting edge of the
move to a more positive
harmonious world is
the "World of Wisdom,"
a variety program
like you have never
seen before, dedicated
solely to the mind,
body, spirit connection.
The growth in human potential
happening all over the world
is not our destination,
but it is our journey.
Tune in and join us for
a "World of Wisdom,"
variety in a new way
on the Wisdom Channel.
>> Today, I'm privileged to
interview one of the premiere
filmmakers in the field
of personal growth
and development.
This is Elda Hartley of the
Hartley Film Foundation.
Elda has devoted and
dedicated her life
to producing films
in different cultures
throughout the world that
bring inspirational messages
to millions.
And we're thrilled to have
her with us here on the Wisdom
Channel.
Welcome, Elda.
>> Happy to be here.
Well, we're looking forward
to having a lot more of you
around the Wisdom
Channel here as you
work with us to provide all
the messages from your films.
I want to know, how long
have you been a filmmaker?
>> I have been in film
for more than 60 years.
But I've been a film
maker for about 30.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah, I mean doing the kind
of film that I have devoted
my life to for
the last 30 years,
films that I used to
call films for a new age.
But now people seem to
think that new age--
a lot of people--
at least, it's had
bad press with some
of the things that happened.
There are always people on the
fringe, who give it a bad name,
and publicists like
to play that up.
But actually, the new age
is the old wisdom, really.
So my films have been about
the legends of the world,
trying to have people understand
that at the core of all
the religions, it's the
same, that we really
do love our neighbors
as ourselves,
and to treat other people
as we'd like to be treated.
That's the basic.
That's basic to every religion.
So we've made films on
all the major religions,
and then we've
made a lot of them
on alternative medicine, what
we used to call holistic health.
>> Right.
>> And on meditation and
everything to do with personal
growth, with helping
us to become more,
to reach the consciousness
three as Reich said in his book.
>> And you've traveled
throughout the world,
and you've gotten
different cultures.
Can you tell us about some
of the variety of films
that you've made?
>> Well, I started
out doing films--
a film with Alan
Watts on Zen Buddhism
and did six with him
before he died in '73.
And then I started doing
films on psychic research.
Elmer Green had come--
I'd done some work with
him, the Meniger foundation
on biofeedback.
And then when Ed Mitchell
came back from the moon
and had had this
religious experience.
He wanted to change
the world, because he
had seen this big blue
marble out there that looked
so beautiful from the moon.
And it's hard to believe that
this gorgeous looking thing
when you get down to it
is full of so much strife.
So he wanted to
make a difference,
and he formed an
organization which
is now called the Institute
of Noetic Sciences.
And so I've been with them
from the very beginning.
I now serve on their board.
And I did do two films with
Ed when he first came back
on psychic research,
because there
was a lot of psychic research
going on at that time.
The funding, though, kind
of dried up after time
from the things that
were being done.
I did things with
[INAUDIBLE],, the great healer,
how she could take--
as a healer, hold the water
in her hand and water plants
with it.
And those plants
would grow better
than the ones that
didn't have this water.
So it was proving really that we
are so much more than we think
we are, that we
really, all of us,
have this potential to become
more, to become more in touch
with the forces, the
energy that's out there,
trying to drive us to
make a better world.
But we get bogged down so
much by all the bad stuff
that we see so much, so little
emphasis on the good stuff.
And that's why I'm so happy
to be involved with the Wisdom
Channel, because we are
going to change the world.
We are going to bring
back the good views.
>> All right.
Well, we're certainly
glad to have you here.
And I'd just like
to ask you, too,
you're such an inspiration in
terms of your life's mission
and purpose and using
this to fulfill.
Can you tell me--
I know you've done some studies
on how people stay young,
young at heart, young
physically, body, mind,
and spirit.
You certainly are
an example of that.
What have you found in your
films and research about that?
>> Oh I did that
film 10 years ago.
It's called "Green Winter."
And it was the last year
of my husband's life.
And he had gotten
so old, so old,
and was only a few
years older than I.
And I started to
examine why is it
that I've been able to
stay as young as I have.
I'm 86.
>> Amazing.
>> And I still really
love life, you know?
And his life has
become really a burden.
And I think it was
because I have always
had this work that I
love so much, you know?
It's having something to do
that you really love to do,
because when I get
up in the morning,
I can't wait to get started.
And an awful lot of
the people that I
know that are even younger than
I am, life is a bore to them,
you know?
They don't know what
to do themselves.
I mean, what am I
going to do today?
They wake up, you know?
And that is a shame,
because here, they
have arrived at a
time in their life
when it should be the
best years of their life.
It really should
be, because they've
gotten past all that
period when they
had to worry a lot about money
and bringing their children up
and all that.
They're now at a spot
where they can really
begin to think about
their own growth,
and that should give them
a lot to do every day.
>> You'd think.
>> Yeah.
>> What have you found in
visiting some of the different
cultures?
I know you've been to Soviet
Georgia and some other places,
where people live many years.
Is there a common
denominator to longevity?
>> Yes.
Yes, there is.
One of the things that's really
important is to eat frugally.
They don't eat much.
They eat probably at
1,200 calories a day.
Now, that may be because
their economy doesn't allow
them to eat very much more.
They don't have a lot
of fats and sweets
and things, no fast
food restaurants.
They have to eat
what's available.
And they all continue to work.
And when they get too old to
go out and work in the fields--
because most of these
are agrarian societies--
they then can still feel
needed, because they
can take care of the children
while their parents are out
working.
>> I believe you say on that
film that work is a life
enhancer.
>> I think it definitely is.
Work that you enjoy--
I think it would be kind
of deadly to have a job you
hated, but you see you--
that's a matter
of your attitude.
You can make yourself like
whatever you're doing.
That's important, too.
>> I know we were talking
about before enlightenment,
after enlightenment,
the chop wood.
Do you want to elaborate?
>> Yeah, chop wood, carry water.
>> Yeah, it's all the
same before and after.
I ran across an
acronym one time that's
PALACE in talking
about longevity.
It's P-A-L-A-C-E. Had
a positive attitude,
the ability to deal with
loss, being active, committed,
and engaged.
And that's something I think
that really as a quick reminder
and helps just what
you've been saying.
>> That's very good.
I'll have to make
a note of that.
I'll do another film with that.
>> The PALACE series.
But we were talking
about your films
that you've done on
alternative healing
and also on religions
of the world.
Can you tell us
some of the people
that you have profiled
in those films?
>> Well, I did three
with Houston Smith.
He wasn't profiled
in it, you know.
I did one on Tibetan Buddhism,
the very first thing with him,
shot at a Tibetan refugee camp
in North India in Dalhousie.
And there, we
filmed these monks,
lamas who could sing chords,
who have since now been
on the entertainment channel
here in the United States.
They were in New York just
a few months ago, you know,
the [INAUDIBLE] monks, who
one man can sing three notes
at a time, you know?
Anyway, Houston
discovered these monks
when he was in India the
year before, and he wrote us,
and he had heard about
us because of the films
with Alan Watts and said
that he was at that time,
he was a professor
of philosophy at MIT.
And he had recorded them
when he was in India
and brought them back and put
them on all their machines
to see that a monk really
could sing a chord.
So he wrote us and said that
these monks were so photogenic,
wouldn't we like to go with him?
Well, my husband and I had--
in our days of making
films for money,
we'd done a lot of sponsored
films for Pan American Airways.
So we were always
ready to travel.
Our passport is ready and
our bag is ready to go, too.
All I have to do is throw two
things in, and I'm ready to go.
So we said, sure, we'll go.
So we went off to do India
and filmed these monks.
And that was
"Requiem for Faith."
Then Houston said, you know,
you should do something
about Sufism.
And I didn't know
what Sufism was.
Well, it happens to be the
mystical element of Islam.
So I had an opportunity to go
with Inayat Khan [INAUDIBLE],,
no [INAUDIBLE] Khan.
The father was [INAUDIBLE] to
his father's [INAUDIBLE],, which
was in India.
And we traveled all over the
Islamic world in India, Turkey,
Morocco, Tunisia, wherever.
And that film turned
out to win some awards.
As a matter of fact,
so did "Requiem."
As a matter of fact, all three
of those films won awards.
And the third one was
"India and the Infinite,"
and that is all of the religions
of India, Hinduism, Buddhism,
Jainism, Zoroastrian,
the whole bit.
>> Also, to talk about your
book that you written that talks
about the religions
of the world,
the six major religions of
the world, "Perennial Wisdom."
And that will certainly
be available for--
can you tell us about the--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Well, actually, the film
was called "The Perennial
Philosophy," and the book is
the narration of that film.
And the film has six
sequences of five minutes each
of each of the major
religions, and again, showing
that the core of all
religions is the same.
The idea was to try to help us
realize that we are much more
connected than we think.
We seem to have always the
things come up that divide us,
and we really are
truly are connected,
and we need to find that
out so that we can make
this world much more peaceful.
>> And that's a common thread
among all of the religions.
>> Right.
>> I want to make sure we
get a good shot of this book,
because I particularly like
the fact that it has wisdom
in the name.
>> Yeah.
>> You must have had
that planned long before
our association.
I don't know.
>> Well, of course, nothing
is an accident, you know.
>> That's right.
>> There are no accidents.
>> No coincidences.
>> Right.
>> Well, we need to
take a quick break here.
But we'll be back in just
a minute with Elda Hartley.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're back with Elda Hartley
now from the Hartley Film
Foundation.
And I just wanted
to ask you, Elda,
your films are distributed
in a variety of ways.
I know that, for
instance, hospitals have
used them, some of the healing.
Can you talk about
that a little bit?
>> Those are used
on closed circuit,
and they're mainly meditation,
things that inspire meditation,
guided meditation for
the patients, you know.
And then some of the
others are mainly
ideas about how to
stay healthy, you know.
>> Well, I think that's such
a testimonial to Western
medicine, accepting some more
of the Eastern philosophies,
perhaps.
And I think that's a
real tribute to the fact
that you've been
able to get that
into the more conventional
mainstream, healing
places, our hospitals.
>> Yeah.
I did the first film, "Holistic
Health and New Medicine," back
before I even knew what
holistic health was,
and nobody else knew either.
But you know, it's grown.
It's in the mainstream.
Everybody is aware of holistic
health or alternative medicine.
Lots of books are
being written on it.
And as a matter of fact,
some of the best sellers
now are books on
that whole subject.
>> Right.
And I think, too, when we're
seeing the transformation
of medical doctors that
are going over into that,
I mean, some very
popular people today
that are espousing some more
of the Eastern theories.
So it's just all bringing
lifestyle choices and changes
into the whole of our being.
>> Well, it's not just
Eastern, because actually,
the idea is to treat the
body, mind, and spirit.
And most of the doctors in the
past, just treated the body,
you know, it was like
it was a machine.
And we really are all three.
So you have to know something
about the emotions that
might have made that
person sick, you know?
That has a lot to do
with your health is
your attitude toward life.
>> Right.
I've heard it said,
too, that if you
can get to the
source of right there
with the emotional
conflict, that often,
things don't have to manifest
themselves physically.
>> That's right.
And that has been brought
out without any question
that it's true.
I mean, doctors cannot pooh
pooh that idea anymore,
because there have been too many
studies that show that if you
get your act together
body, mind, and spirit,
you can many times bring
yourself back to health.
>> Right.
And I think there's so much
work, as you mentioned,
that's being done
in that field today,
from Bernie Siegel,
who I know that you've
done some films with, Dr.
Deepak Chopra, Andrew Weil.
A lot of people today are
out there with that message.
>> Right.
>> So I think just healing
and the whole self has so much
to do with where we go today.
>> Well, I think it's very
encouraging that a channel,
like Wisdom, is going to be
devoted to just this one thing
of getting our body,
mind, and spirit together,
because I think many people have
been crying for a long time.
And it's very difficult,
very difficult to get
any of the networks to play
these things because they feel
that they lose their audience,
that the average person is not
really interested.
I think that there are at
least 25 million people
in this country, who, once
they know about our channel,
will want to tune in, because
it's going to be all about just
that, about how to
make yourself more,
how to be happier That's the
main thing, how to be happy.
>> Right.
And who isn't looking for that?
Sometimes it's not as far
away as we might think.
It's within.
We can look within.
>> Well, we've been
indoctrinated with so much
negativism in this culture.
I mean, it's all
you see, really.
And we are brought
up on television.
And it's just full of
nothing but and criticism
and putting people down.
I mean, do you ever hear anybody
talking saying anything good
about anybody?
It's always gossip, always
to put somebody down.
But we need to have people
that people can look up to.
I mean, the other
night, I needed
to have something to inspire
me, so I went and got Gandhi.
That is the one film that's
been made in the last decade
that I know over a long
time, it's really inspiring.
That man-- I mean, I could
look at that over and over,
because he was so noble.
Well, there are
other noble people
in the world right today,
but we don't hear about them.
And the Wisdom Channel is
going to bring those people
to people.
>> Absolutely.
And we know you're out
there, you 25 million people.
So this is the place to turn to.
And I think you're right.
I mean, there's such a yearning
for this information and wisdom
of the ages.
And we're excited to be able
to bring this programming
to our viewers and listeners.
If you could tell us
a little bit more,
too, about the studies
that you've done with--
let's do the
alternative religions,
or comparative
religions, that series
that you've done on that.
Can you talk a
little about that?
>> Well, that's a
perennial philosophy.
And it's the narration of from
that video is in that book
that you showed.
And I can't tell you anymore
about it than I already have,
unless you have a
specific question.
>> Well, just I know if we were
looking at it in your book,
you go through the
six major religions.
Could you just outline
those, mentioned those for--
>> Well, you know what they are.
The three Western religions
Christianity, Judaism,
and Islam.
And the three Eastern religions
are Hinduism, Buddhism,
and Taoism.
>> So you've capsulized
that pretty well.
And there's the universal
thread that flows through--
>> Through them all.
Yes.
>> I like the--
>> But the emphasis is
different, you know.
The emphasis is different.
In Buddhism, the emphasis
is on compassion.
In Christianity, the
emphasis is on love.
They're the same, but
a little different.
In compassion, it's
about putting yourself
in the other person's shoes.
With love, it's a
feeling that you
get that makes you love
everything and everybody.
It's difficult to
really describe,
but many people have had
religious experiences,
and they last for a
little while, you know?
I had one when I was
about 18 years old.
It lasted for about three weeks.
And when I loved
everybody and everything,
and the world was
so beautiful, and I
have been trying to
get that feeling back
for these 65 years.
Isn't that awful?
And I've never felt able to
really get it back like that.
But the memory of it makes
me keep trying, you know?
>> Some of the things you've
talked about in terms of death
and dying and near-death
experiences and how you really
don't have a fear of dying, and
if you could talk a little bit
about that.
>> Well, I think that
if you don't fear death,
then it makes your life
here so much more pleasant.
I think it's-- you
know, Christians really
shouldn't fear death, because
we were told that we were going
to go to heaven if we were good,
and most of us try to be good.
And so why do we hang
on to it the way we do?
Why do people hang on
when really and truly,
their life has lost all its--
it's lost its usefulness
and its value, you know?
It seems to me that if they
weren't afraid of death,
they'd be willing to go, no?
I'm kind of looking forward
to it to tell you the truth.
I don't want to leave.
I like it here now.
>> You have more work to do now.
>> Yes, and I'm in good health.
But if I were ill, I would
think I would say, please,
let me get there.
Let me go and have a little
better life, you know?
And I don't understand
why people feel--
they obviously do not
believe in life after death,
or they wouldn't hang
on the way they do.
And that's a shame, because
there's plenty of proof
that there is life after death.
There's plenty of proof.
Just go to the library.
Just ask the librarian
to direct you
to some books that
talk about this.
There are just dozens of them,
and you can't read those books.
The one that I read lately was
so marvelous called "Letters
from the Light."
I can't remember the
name of the author.
It is a judge who died and
wrote these letters back,
and they're so meaningful.
I've given it to
friends of mine,
who are on their
deathbed, and they all
say it just does
them so much good.
That's a book we ought to
try to have on this program,
because it's a wonderful book.
And nobody who read
that could possibly
doubt that they're going to
continue and continue really
in a very interesting life.
>> I think you talk, too,
about that we're here to learn
life's lessons.
And you may come back for that
till we learn those lessons.
>> Of course, I believe
in reincarnation.
It's not-- it wouldn't upset
me terribly if somebody proved
it wasn't true, but I think
there's plenty of proof
that it is true.
And I like the idea that
I'll get another chance,
because I know I haven't
made it in this life time.
I know I'm not
enlightened, and I
intend to be enlightened
before I finish.
>> Well, we're certainly looking
forward to having you with us
more on the Wisdom Channel and
fulfilling your life's purpose
and mission.
And thank you for being
with us here today.
>> I was happy to be here.